In this video, we'll learn
more about references.
We've already seen how useful
references can be when used
as function parameters.
We learned about that in the
functions section of the course.
Although a reference may sound
similar to a pointer, they're
actually very different.
A reference is an
alias for a variable.
So whenever you use the
reference, you're actually
using the variable it refers to.
References must always be initialized
to a variable when you declare
them, and they can never be null.
Once you initialize a reference,
you can't change it so that's an
alias for a different variable.
As mentioned earlier, references are
great to use as function parameters.
When you first start out in c++,
you might find it useful to think
of a reference as a constant
pointer that's automatically
de-referenced when you use it.
We've already seen using
references as function parameters,
so let's see some other uses.
References are often used
in range-based for loops to
access collection elements
inside each iteration.
Here's an example of a range-based
for loop that does not use references.
In this case, we have a vector of c++
string objects named stooges, and it's
initialized to Larry Moe and Curly.
Then we use a range-based for loop
to iterate through the vector.
At each iteration, we assign
Funny to each vector element.
Then we have another range-based
for loop that displays the
contents of the stooges vector.
Notice the output, nothing changed.
We didn't change the vector at
all, even though we assigned
funny to each element in the loop.
So what's going on.
The problem is that the str
variable name in the first loop
is a copy for each of the vector
elements as we loop through them.
So we're setting the copy to
funny, but we're never changing
the actual elements in the vector.
Now let's see how we can
use references to actually
change the vector elements.
Here we have the same example,
except that the str variable in
the first loop is now a reference.
In this case, a reference to
each of the c++ string objects.
Now str is an alias for those objects,
and when we assign Funny to str, we're
actually changing the vector elements.
You can see now that when we display
the vector, the elements in the vector
have all indeed changed to funny.
Notice what happens if we add
the const qualifier to the loop
variable in the first loop.
Now we're preventing any change to
the data in the vector because the
compiler marks it as read-only.
So this code now gives
us a compiler error.
This is not what we want
since we really do want to
modify the vector elements.
But you can see that the
compiler is doing exactly
what you're asking it to do.
It makes sense for us to use the
const qualifier in the second
loop, the loop that actually
displays the vector elements.
Also by using a reference, we're not
incurring the cost of copying each
vector element in each loop iteration.
So in this case, it makes sense
to use the const qualifier for the
reference str in the loop when we're
displaying the vector elements.
So any attempt to change them
would probably be a mistake so we
can have the compiler help us out
by making the reference const.
Now any attempt to change the vector
element results in a compiler error.
Unless you have a specific
reason to copy elements in
range-based for loops, you
should use reference variables
to make your code more efficient.
And if you aren't going to
modify the collection elements,
make the reference const.
Rather than go over everything we
already covered regarding using
references as function parameters,
please refer to the section
11 videos and examples where
I go over the use of reference
parameters in functions in detail.
We'll head over to the IDE now and see
some of these examples in live code.
Okay, so I'm in the IDE.
I'm in the section 12 workspace
in the references project.
And this is about as simple an example
as I can come up with for references.
So here I've got an integer called
num, and I'm initializing it to 100.
And I've got a reference called ref
that I'm initializing it to num.
So ref is an alias to num.
So if i display num,
I'm going to get a 100.
If I display ref, I'm
going to get a 100.
They're aliases.
In this case, the reference
is an alias to the num.
Okay, so notice no
de-referencing, nothing.
Just use it straight as
is, and it's automatically
going to be de-referenced.
Behind the scenes, it's
basically a pointer.
That's how it's implemented
behind the scenes.
But all that's been
abstracted away for you.
So in this case, here,
I'm changing num to 200.
So I'm going straight to the
variable and changing it to 200.
So when I display num,
I'm going to get 200.
And when I display the reference,
it's an alias to the number.
Again, I'm going to get 200.
Here, I'm changing num, but I'm
changing it through the reference.
So I'm setting it to 300.
Again, they're aliases.
So that's what you get.
Hopefully, that's pretty
easy to understand I think.
Now let's do another example
that's based on the example
that I did on the slides.
But before we do that, let's
run this, so I'll build and run.
And you can see 100 100 200 200
300 300, just what we expected.
Okay, so now let's do an example
of using reference parameters
inside range-based for loops,
just like we did in the slides.
So let me clear that, and I'll
scroll up just a little bit, and I'll
uncomment out this code right here.
Okay, this is the code that
worked on the vector of strings.
So here's where we're at.
We've got a vector of string objects
right here on line 29, called
stooges, and we're initializing
it to Larry Moe and Curly.
Then I've got a range-based for loop.
Now remember, the auto,
that's the compiler figure
out what the type of str is.
In this case, the collection is
stooges and it's a vector of string.
So str will be a string
at each iteration.
And then what we're doing is
we're saying str is funny.
So the idea is that or the what
the programmer intended to do
was to change Larry Moe and
Curly to funny funny funny.
Okay, but it doesn't work.
The reason it doesn't work
is because str is a copy.
So each time in, we're making
a copy of Larry, a copy of
Moe and a copy of Curly.
So sure, we're changing the copy
to funny, but we're not changing
any of these actuals to funny.
So what we can do is and if you
notice we have a simple loop
here that just displays them.
And when we run this in a
second, you'll see that this
will display Larry Moe and Curly.
Okay, so no changes at all,
just like we saw in the slides.
In this next example, what we're
doing is we're using a reference here.
You can see the ampersand.
So at each iteration of the loop, str
will be a reference to the actual.
So now that str is going to be an
alias for each one of these guys
at each iteration of the loop.
So when we say str is funny, now
we're really replacing Larry Moe
and Curly with funny funny funny.
So when we come over here and display,
we're going to see funny funny funny.
Okay, so we'll run that in a second.
But the other thing we wanted
to say was in this example here,
I'm displaying those three string
objects that are in the vector.
But in this case, I'm
making copies of them.
There's no danger in changing them,
right because I've got a copy of them.
So if I do change them like I did
here, I'm only changing the copy.
But I'm making copies.
So that's pretty inefficient.
In this case, those string objects
are -- they're pretty efficient.
But it could be some user-defined
type where making a copy of
it could be pretty expensive.
You're allocating space, and you're
making a copy let's say a couple
hundred by 1000 bytes or something.
So it could be very very
expensive operation.
In this case, we want to pass that in
by reference, like we're doing here.
And -- but the danger with that
is that now we can change the
elements, right, which we don't want.
So that's why we use the const.
So this gives us the protection of
making those elements read-only, but
it also allows them not to be copied.
In this case, we're just going
to create aliases to them.
So very efficient and pretty safe
because we can't change them.
Okay, so hopefully that makes sense.
Let me run this real quick.
And you could see the first
time through, and I'll move
this slightly over here.
We've got Larry Moe and Curly.
So we didn't change a thing.
We expected funny funny funny.
We got Larry Moe and Curly.
Now when we're using a reference,
we do indeed change the actual.
So now we see funny funny funny.
Okay, so give that a try, play
around with these, try to create a
reference to a pointer and see if
you can figure out how that works.
All right, so that's pretty
much it for references.
Remember, I covered how to use
reference parameters and how to pass
references to functions in section 11.
There's a whole section there on
using reference parameters and
when you use const and so forth.
So I'll see you in the next video.